README.md, before:

# BrainRot-GPT
**This is a GPT model but brain rot rizzler**
![Image](src/imgs/Demo.jpg)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> *If you like this project, or find this project helpful, please give me a star. Thank you!* <br/><br/>
> The original training was done on 4 × H100 80GB GPUs. With DDP enabled, it roughly takes about 12 hours to complete training. <br/>
> You can run the model with less powerful setup, but since this project is not yet done there is no weights released. <br/>

> [!NOTE]
> If you have any questions or suggestions, please feel free to open an issue or pull request. <br/>
> This project covers useful information about a self implemented GPT model <br/>

## Structure
- `fineweb_dataset.py` — Downloads the FineWeb dataset from HuggingFace, splits it, and encodes it into binary format
- `dataloader.py` — Implements a Dataset class for loading binary files as torch tensors
- `model.py` — Standard implementation of GPT model
- `model_.py` (INCOMPLETE) — Optimized implementation of GPT model
- `train.py` — Handles model training, including optimization and checkpointing
- `eval.py` (INCOMPLETE) — Loads a trained model and generates sample outputs for evaluation

## Usage
*Warning* - Make sure to change all the hyperparameters to fit your needs
1. Run `fineweb_dataset.py` - `test.bin` and `train.bin` will be generated.
2. Run `train.py` - This will start the main training loop.
3. Run `eval.py` - This will load your saved model and generate sample texts.

## FineWeb
The FineWeb dataset consists of more than 15T tokens of cleaned and deduplicated english web data from CommonCrawl. The one being used in the being used in this project is "sample-10BT", which covers 10 billion tokens (in gpt-2 coding) about size 30GB.

## Model
--- `[+,-]` for better or worse, `[P,L]` for performance or loss, `*` for minimal effects ---

### Standard Model
The **standard implementation** can be found in `model.py`.  
This version has minimal changes from the original GPT-2 model:

- [x] Causal Attention - Flash Attention `[P+++]` <br/> Flash attention allows GPU to calculate Attention Mechanism Faster

- [x] GELU - 'tanh' performance optimization  `[P+, L*-]` <br/> Tanh approx allows faster calculation with minimal loss to accuracy

- [x] Attention Block - Pre-norm instead of Post-norm  `[L+]` <br/> Pre-norm generally yields better loss compare with Post-norm

- [x] Encoder - "cl100k_base" Tokenizer  `[P--, L++]` <br/> Upsizing vocab_size and better encoding can result in better relative loss

- [x] Generation - Pre-allocated generation buffer  `[P+]` <br/> Improves performance by trading off a bit of memory usage

### Optimized Model
The **optimized implementation** can be found in `model_.py`.  
This version focuses on improvements over the standard model.  
*Currently in progress:*

- [x] Causal Attention - Grouped Query Attention  `[P+++, L-]` <br/> Saves massive amount of memory for worse loss, this can be covered by scaling up parameters

- [x] Attention Block - RSM Norm  `[P+, L*+]` <br/> RSM Norm does less computation, yields better result in most cases

- [x] Positional Embedding - ROPE  `[P-, L++]` <br/> ROPE Embedding allows more accurate positional embedding

- [ ] Forward - K,V Caching  `[P+]` <br/> K, V caching avoid redundant computation, but takes more memory space

- [x] MLP - SwiGLU  `[P-, L+]` <br/> Smoother GELU activation, not sure why it is better

- [x] Bfloat16 `[P+, L-]` <br/> Bfloat16 allows scale up of parameters

- [ ] MOE `[P++,L++]` <- I have no idea how to do this yet

### CUDA Optimizations
torch.nn.parallel.DistributedDataParallel `[P+++++]`<br/> - Stands for `Distributed Data Parallel`, allows multiple nodes, gpus in each node to work together.<br/><br/>
torch.backends.cudnn.benchmark `[P*+]` in LLM<br/> - Allows pytorch to auto tune CNN convolution algorithm.<br/><br/>
torch.backends.cuda.matmul.allow_tf32 `[P++]`<br/> - Allows GPU to enable tf32 format in matmul requires GPU support.<br/><br/>
torch.backends.cudnn.allow_tf32 `[P++]`<br/> - Allows GPU to enable tf32 format in general.<br/><br/>
torch.set_float32_matmul_precision `[P...P+++]`<br/> - Set matmul precision trading speed for accuracy.<br/><br/>
torch.compile `[P+++]`<br/> - Compile model into one to improve performance. "max-autotune" or "reduce-overhead" are good, with the first one slightly faster.<br/><br/>
torch.optim.AdamW `[P++]`<br/> - Fused speeds up the computation but requires GPU support.<br/><br/>
torch.autocast `[P+++]`<br/> - Enable automatic mixed precision to float16 or bfloat16, saves massive computation and memory decrease accuracy.<br/><br/>

## Goal
The final product should talk in Gen-Z terms towards given prompt, hence the name Brain-Rot GPT.

## Todos
- [x] Finish Working GPT Model
- [ ] Implement optimized version of Model
- [ ] Set up own scrapper for custom dataset (reddit comments)
- [ ] LORA finetune for BrainRot GPT
- [ ] Test and release
- [ ] Custom Tokenizer <- not sure if needed

Commit message:

Stable standard model & added benchmark

README.md, after:

# BrainRot-GPT
**This is a GPT model but brain rot rizzler**
![Image](src/imgs/Demo.jpg)

> [!IMPORTANT]
> *If you like this project, or find this project helpful, please give me a star. Thank you!* <br/><br/>
> The original training was done on 4 × H100 80GB GPUs. With DDP enabled, it roughly takes about 12 hours to complete training. <br/>
> You can run the model with less powerful setup, but since this project is not yet done there is no weights released. <br/>

> [!NOTE]
> If you have any questions or suggestions, please feel free to open an issue or pull request. <br/>
> This project covers useful information about a self implemented GPT model <br/>

## Structure
- `fineweb_dataset.py` — Downloads the FineWeb dataset from HuggingFace, splits it, and encodes it into binary format
- `dataloader.py` — Implements a Dataset class for loading binary files as torch tensors
- `model.py` — Standard implementation of GPT model
- `model_.py` (INCOMPLETE) — Optimized implementation of GPT model
- `train.py` — Handles model training, including optimization and checkpointing
- `eval.py` (INCOMPLETE) — Loads a trained model and generates sample outputs for evaluation

## Usage
*Warning* - Make sure to change all the hyperparameters to fit your needs
1. Run `fineweb_dataset.py` - `test.bin` and `train.bin` will be generated.
2. Run `train.py` - This will start the main training loop.
3. Run `eval.py` - This will load your saved model and generate sample texts.

## FineWeb
The FineWeb dataset consists of more than 15T tokens of cleaned and deduplicated english web data from CommonCrawl. The one being used in the being used in this project is "sample-10BT", which covers 10 billion tokens (in gpt-2 coding) about size 30GB.

## Model
--- `[+,-]` for better or worse, `[P,L]` for performance or loss, `*` for minimal effects ---

### Standard Model
The **standard implementation** can be found in `model.py`.  
This version has minimal changes from the original GPT-2 model:

- [x] Causal Attention - Flash Attention `[P+++]` <br/> Flash attention allows GPU to calculate Attention Mechanism Faster

- [x] GELU - 'tanh' performance optimization  `[P+, L*-]` <br/> Tanh approx allows faster calculation with minimal loss to accuracy

- [x] Attention Block - Pre-norm instead of Post-norm  `[L+]` <br/> Pre-norm generally yields better loss compare with Post-norm

- [x] Encoder - "cl100k_base" Tokenizer  `[P--, L++]` <br/> Upsizing vocab_size and better encoding can result in better relative loss

- [x] Generation - Pre-allocated generation buffer  `[P+]` <br/> Improves performance by trading off a bit of memory usage

### Optimized Model
The **optimized implementation** can be found in `model_.py`.  
This version focuses on improvements over the standard model.  
*Currently in progress:*

- [x] Causal Attention - Grouped Query Attention  `[P+++, L-]` <br/> Saves massive amount of memory for worse loss, this can be covered by scaling up parameters

- [x] Attention Block - RSM Norm  `[P+, L*+]` <br/> RSM Norm does less computation, yields better result in most cases

- [x] Positional Embedding - ROPE  `[P-, L++]` <br/> ROPE Embedding allows more accurate positional embedding

- [x] Optimizer - RAdam `[P-, L+++]` <br/> RAdam is a better version of Adam, it is more stable.

- [x] MLP - SwiGLU  `[P-, L+]` <br/> Smoother GELU activation, not sure why it is better

- [ ] Forward - K,V Caching  `[P+]` <br/> K, V caching avoid redundant computation, but takes more memory space

- [ ] MOE `[P++,L++]` <- I have no idea how to do this yet

### CUDA Optimizations
**Note**: Some of these optimizations might be automatically turned on, or might overlap with each other.
torch.nn.parallel.DistributedDataParallel `[P+++++]`<br/> - Stands for `Distributed Data Parallel`, allows multiple nodes, gpus in each node to work together.<br/><br/>
torch.backends.cudnn.benchmark `[P*+]` in LLM<br/> - Allows pytorch to auto tune CNN convolution algorithm.<br/><br/>
torch.backends.cuda.matmul.allow_tf32 `[P++]`<br/> - Allows GPU to enable tf32 format in matmul requires GPU support.<br/><br/>
torch.set_float32_matmul_precision `[P...P++]`<br/> - Set matmul precision trading speed for accuracy.<br/><br/>
torch.optim.AdamW `[P*+]`<br/> - Fused speeds up the computation but requires GPU support.<br/><br/>
torch.compile `[P+++]`<br/> - Compile model into one to improve performance.<br/><br/>
torch.autocast `[P+++]`<br/> - Enable automatic mixed precision to float16 or bfloat16, saves massive computation and memory decrease accuracy.<br/><br/>

## Goal
The final product should talk in Gen-Z terms towards given prompt, hence the name Brain-Rot GPT.

## Todos
- [x] Finish Working GPT Model
- [ ] Implement optimized version of Model
- [ ] Set up own scrapper for custom dataset (reddit comments)
- [ ] LORA finetune for BrainRot GPT
- [ ] Test and release
- [ ] Custom Tokenizer <- not sure if needed
